# Solution Ex 7.28 <br>
**a)** This is a disjunction with 28 disjuncts, each one saying that two of the neighbors aretrue and the others are false. The ﬁrst disjunct is <br>X<sub>2,2</sub>∧X<sub>1,2</sub>∧ ¬X<sub>0,2</sub>∧¬X<sub>0,1</sub>∧ ¬X<sub>2,1</sub>∧ ¬X<sub>0,0</sub>∧ ¬X<sub>1,0</sub>∧¬X<sub>2,0</sub><br>
The other 27 disjuncts each select two different X<sub>i,j</sub> to be true.<br><br>
**b)** There will be <sup>n</sup>C<sub>k</sub> disjuncts, each saying that k of the n symbols are true and the others false.<br><br>
**c)** For each of the cells that have been probed, take the resulting number n revealed by thegame and construct a sentence with <sup>n</sup>C<sub>8</sub> disjuncts. Conjoin all the sentences together.Then use DPLL to answer the question of whether this sentence entails X<sub>i,j</sub> for the particular i, j pair you are interested in.<br><br>
**d)** To encode the global constraint that there are M mines altogether, we can constructa disjunct with <sup>m</sup>C<sub>k</sub> disjuncts, each of size N. Remember <sup>m</sup>C<sub>n=m!/(m-n)!</sub>. So for a Minesweeper game with 100 cells and 20 mines, this will be morre than 10<sup>39</sup>, andthus cannot be represented in any computer. However, we can represent the globalconstraint within the DPLL algorithm itself. We add the parameter min and max tothe DPLL function; these indicate the minimum and maximum number of unassignedsymbols that must be true in the model. For an unconstrained problem the values 0 andN will be used for these parameters. For a mineseeper problem the value M will beused for both min and max. Within DPLL, we fail (return false) immediately if min isless than the number of remaining symbols, or if max is less than 0. For each recursivecall to DPLL, we update min and max by subtracting one when we assign a true valueto a symbol.<br><br>
**e)** No conclusions are invalidated by adding this capability to DPLL and encoding theglobal constraint using it. <br><br>
**f)** Consider this string of alternating 1’s and unprobed cells (indicated by a dash):<br>
|-|1|-|1|-|1|-|1|-|1|-|1|-|1|-|<br> There are two possible models: either there are mines under every even-numbereddash, or under every odd-numbered dash. Making a probe at either end will determinewhether cells at the far end are empty or contain mines.
